Intro

This is the highest scored review on this site, and the only reason I didn't give it a 100% is that I believe there is a possibility that I see a better movie sometime in the future. That is what I originally said when I penned this review almost 4 years ago, writing the review for my favorite movie I'd ever seen. I only saw this movie for the first time in 2019, so I never had the opportunity to see it in theatres, where it deserves to be seen. I recently was fortunate enough to see this in IMAX for its 10th anniversary, and man was it special. When the movie came out in theatres, I was too young to really appreciate the filmmaking and emotion behind this masterpiece, so in a way, I've always been glad I never saw this in theatres when it came out in 2014. But now being old enough to understand just how special of a film this is, I'm so happy to be able to give this an updated review, fresh off having seen it in the biggest IMAX screen in Washington. While it might not be quite as good as a 70mm IMAX theatre, those showings are so limited and only in a handful of locations across the US. I'm going to be in San Francisco next week, which has one of those theatres, but by the time I realized the tickets were all sold out. I'm making sure to keep my original review intact, so I'll be adding all of my updated thoughts in italics, and keeping the original review content in regular text. Let's get into why this movie is my favorite film of all time.

My Thoughts

I have so many thoughts on this movie, but in order to keep this review as concise as possible, I'm going to organize it into 3 categories, which map to my favorite 3 elements of the movie: score, concept, and ending.
in order to keep this review as concise as possible

Yep, I'm going to go back on what I said a few years ago, this isn't going to be a concise review; it's going to be far from it. I only addressed my top 3 broad elements of what makes this film so great, in an attempt to limit my writing to ~1000 words and keep it roughly structured like your standard 5 paragraph essay. But there are too many things that were striking and impressive about this film to limit myself, so now we're going completely overboard and I'm writing about everything I possibly can; including, this time, the tiniest bit of critique; after all, I have to justify why I didn't give this a 100% besides my (still correct) reasoning above of not giving it a perfect score in case I watch something better in the future. As I mentioned above, I'll keep my new thoughts in italics. So let me try to give an updated table of contents:

1. Score
2. Concept
3. Science
4. Characters
5. Ending

Score

As a whole, Interstellar's soundtrack is not only Zimmer's best work but also the best movie soundtrack ever created. I would add that Zimmer's "Time" from the Inception soundtrack is the greatest single track of all time, but looking at all the tracks as a whole, Interstellar wins any day of the week. Interstellar's soundtrack is one of the most unique soundtracks ever created, known for its big, beautiful organ-like sound. In fact, Zimmer actually went to Temple Church in London, an 800+-year-old church, in order to record the organ parts of each of the tracks. The futuristic organ sound really contributes to the reason why this soundtrack sounds perfect, but not only does the soundtrack sound perfect, but Zimmer and Nolan also intentionally intertwined the score with the story. What do I mean by that? Well, perhaps the biggest theme in the entire movie is time (as with basically every Nolan film). Specifically, on some planets that Cooper and Brand visit, time relative to earth goes by much much faster, creating a lot of anxiety for the characters not to waste a single second on these planets. In order to make the audience feel this anxiety, Zimmer ingeniously places a small yet noticeable "ticking" sound in the background of a few of the tracks ("Mountains", "Tick-Tock", "No Time For Caution"). These ticks happen at a tempo of 48BPM. Now I'm not going to do the math, but 48BPM was chosen intentionally because each tick roughly represents one day on earth passing. If you don't believe me in how incredibly smart and cool this is, go listen to "Mountains" on youtube, and you'll see what I mean by Zimmer trying to make you feel the anxiety that our protagonists did. That's why I truly believe this was the most beautiful and ingenious movie soundtrack ever created.

I couldn't agree more with everything I said above, but I now have a refined appreciation for Hans' creativity and genius as a composer. I got to see him perform live a few months ago, and even wrote an article about it: A Night with Hans. Hans and the band played a full Interstellar suite, which lasted about 15 minutes. And listening to the score alone without any visuals really allowed me to focus on how intentional each component of the score is. The organ is still without a doubt the most memorable part of the track but the piano and everything else is just as crucial. I want to go back to talking about the intentional BPM of the ticking sound from Mountains. The main purpose of it was to be symbolic of the importance of time and how their time relative to Earth was just ticking away on Miller's planet. An additional effect I noticed this time was how it made me very aware and conscious of my own heartbeat; the 48BPM is also quite close to a resting heart rate, probably within 5BPM of mine. So it almost deliberately made me stressed for the characters' safety which was so cool. It's so cool that the music combined with the images I'm seeing on the screen can subconsciously affect how I'm feeling. That's so powerful.

Concept

The main idea of Interstellar is what I believe makes this the deepest and most beautiful film I've had the pleasure of watching. At the core, the idea is that earth is so altered by climate change, and it is about to become uninhabitable by humans, so a crew of astronauts ventures outside of the solar system in search of the new earth. The other issue being faced by the crew is the protagonist, Coop, has a young daughter that he's trying to get back to, and outside the solar system, there are some planets where time dilation causes time relative to earth to be significantly accelerated, so the crew is not only trying to find second earth, but they're racing to do it because they have a time limit to save the people on earth, and also get back to see their loved ones. It's such an incredible story because, for one thing, it doesn't seem that unrealistic! It's not like they're trying to save the planet from aliens, they're trying to save it from irreversible climate change, which is much more real, and provides for a higher connection with the audience. Second, the concept of time dilation adds emotion and depth to the story. It lets us know that there's a deadline to complete the mission, which retains our attention through the entire journey through space and time. Both of these two factors combine to form the backbone of the story of this film, and I really can't describe in words how interesting this main concept makes the entire story.

I'll dive into this a little more here; one thing I missed was how at the center of everything was humanity. Humanity, the survival instinct, and love are 3 key elements at play in each character's set of wants and desires. There's an interesting conflict of interests at play between the selfish desire to see your family again, and the need to save the entire species from extinction. Coop is the most conflicted of any of the crew, being the only one with children. It's also the same reason why Dr. Mann isn't a true villain in the normal sense of the word. He's clearly been affected mentally by living alone for so long, which is why he even falsely drew the crew thereby sending up his beacon. I'll admit, some of the lines in the script were a little cheesy when trying to mention this stuff explicitly; in particular, Brand's assertion that love has to mean something as a bid to justify why they should go to Edmunds' planet. The delivery was a little cheesy and took me out of the movie, but the concept is interesting nonetheless. And ironically, if they had listened to her they would have discovered that Edmund's planet ended up being the best option by far, being where Brand ended up in the finale of the film setting up a colony, which almost resembles Tatooine a little bit.

Science

This is sort of a subsection of the concept section above. But this section refers to the scientific concepts that drive the time-related plot device used to create the best ending I've ever seen in a film, which I talk about below. The science in this movie is really important to get right. Or as close to right as can be done. This movie is so realistic in so many senses, that if they didn't fully commit to making the time-dilation feel real to an audience, it would completely take them out of the film and almost invalidate the other claims they make about love being a quantifiable and significant connection. Basically, the theory about what happens evolves over the course of the film.

To start, we're introduced to Murph's "ghost" which is presumed to be some sort of weird magnetic field that leads them to the hidden NASA base. The importance of gravity is first discussed when Doyle mentions they've been observing weird gravitational anomalies, and they presume the magnetic disruption in Murph's room is related to that. They mention there's a wormhole just beyond Saturn, and that since it's not a naturally occurring phenomenon, "someone" had to have placed it there. From then, we are meant to assume there is some higher-life form that is aiding humanity, whom the characters refer to as "they." There's the really cool scene where they enter the wormhole and Brand notices time dilation on her hand and says it's the first handshake. It's not until the climax of the film that Coop discovers what really happened: in the far future, humans have discovered a way to live in 5 dimensions, and the key is gravity: they've figured out how to manipulate gravity, which transcends time. Coop is able to communicate with Murph in the past by manipulating gravity. There isn't some higher life form aiding the crew, it's just humanity in the future helping themselves in the past to ensure their survival as a species. It's a little trippy and hard to understand, but all of the science and things related to time dilation and relativity and wormholes and blackholes is pretty sound. I only say this because Nolan hired a few physicists as advisors for the film, and one of them, Kip Thorne, won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 2017. For what you might ask? For this theories on blackholes, wormholes, and time travel. That's pretty awesome.

Characters

I'll sort of go into both the characters (writing) and their delivery (acting) here. It's so rare that a film as large as this can nail reasonable character arcs for every role. I don't really have an issue with any single character in the film and where their path ends up leading. First off I'll dive into Coop and Brand. I strongly support the decision to not make them fall in love like what would happen in a standard-issue sci-fi movie. I liked how much each of them grew throughout the film. Coop ends the movie finding his place among the stars like he was talking about at the beginning, completing his mission and saving his children, the only mission he truly cared about, along with reuniting with Murph as he promised. Brand is able to combine her affection and love for individuals with the need for saving the human race at large and ends up founding the first extraterrestrial colony on Edmunds' planet. I wouldn't change a thing with either of their characters.

Mann was an interesting case. First of all, I think it was really funny that they intentionally did not reveal what he looked like until Matt Damon woke up from cryosleep. And I liked the way that they very subtly revealed his true nature by first hinting at it with his reluctance to let them fix the robot which he had turned into a bomb. As I mentioned earlier, he's not truly evil like a typical villain, he's driven by the primal desire to survive, and serves as an antagonist in the film because he's being reckless and endangering the crew, including killing Rom. His fate had to end in death. There was no other way to handle what happened.

I'd argue the most important character to get right in this film is Murph. Coop is without a doubt the protagonist in the film, but Murph is the most important character in the film; she's at the center of everything. Coop even realizes this himself when he sees that the tesseract is depicting Murph's bedroom across infinitely many points in time. And Chris and Jonathan nailed the writing. The most important thing they did was the decision to have her be angry at Coop for leaving. That was so critical. It led to so many important emotional scenes, including the one of Coop crying while watching the videos from the past 23 years that he missed while on the surface of Miller's planet. And above all else, it was so important because it allowed for the emotional scene where she realizes Coop is communicating with her via gravity across time. It allows her to forgive him for what she thought he did, and abandon her, as she realizes he's still out there trying to save her. It allows for the scene in the ending where old Murph delivers the single most emotional line of the entire film:
_because my dad promised me_

Ending

As many of you may have realized by now, I absolutely love a good movie ending. I think it's so important for me to have a good ending because I love feeling wrapped up by the end of it. To me, truly good movies are marked by endings that make me not want a sequel: endings so good that a sequel would absolutely ruin the beauty of the film. Interstellar had one of the most beautiful movie endings ever. This ending has something I like to call a callback resolver. This is a term I totally made up, but what I mean by it is a resolution to a question presented earlier in the film. In this case, we find out that it was Coop sending binary (morse) encoded messages through space and time to his daughter Murph. This realization is the craziest, wildest, and most incredible end to wrap up this film. I can't do justice to it, you'll just have to see for yourself what I mean by this mind-blowing moment.

The ending is so mind-blowing and emotional because we really only truly understand the full picture once Coop is in the 5D tesseract. We realize that it was him communicating all along, including the binary leading Murph and Coop to the NASA base, and the morse code STAY. It's also so satisfying when Murph as an adult finally realizes this and is able to solve the equations that allow them to evacuate a large portion of the planet on the enormous space station that Coop is rescued onto. More than that, and this falls back to the part of what I was talking about in the characters section, she finally realizes that her father didn't abandon her as she thought for so many years. It also helps restore enough hope that it (presumably) helps her mend her relationship with Tom as well. Perhaps the most emotional scene in the entire film comes when Coop walks into Murph's hospital room, as a man out of his time. Surrounded by all of his distant descendants, Murph is 90-something years old, which is so crazy because Coop sees his daughter as older than he is. He's her father, but she is much wiser than he is having lived longer than him. Having the clips of old Murph play at the very start of the film without much explanation is genius. We don't even figure out until the last 10 minutes of the movie that those clips were recorded for a museum on the space station, and that the old woman was Murph. Going from that heavy emotional reunion to a more hopeful note narrated by Murph/Ellen Burstyn was such a nice satisfying conclusion that I don't think will be topped ever.

Wrap-up

So yeah. I'm left speechless after this movie. The combination of everything in the film masterfully stitched together by Nolan to create this one, united piece of art is truly breathtaking. I really hope you'll give it a watch. I'm so curious to see the updated word count on this review. Upon originally publishing the review I remember it was 1000 exactly, which was intentional. Then a few months later I cut some fat from it bringing it down to 861, where it currently stands before I go copy and paste this entire monster. The film is truly a different experience in theatres. From the SFX to Hans playing the Temple Church's organ, to the massive screen. This is the kind of movie that inspires me to write my own screenplay, a story so impactful that all I want to do is make my own. Like I said a few years ago, I really hope you'll give it a watch.